# Password Utility Tool: Documentation

###### written by Andrea Croci Angelini.

Read time: ~5-10 minutes

## Description

This project is a front-end only web application that acts as a simple 
password manager. It allows users to generate and test secure passwords, 
ranging from fully randomized passwords of arbitrary length, to unique 
domain passwords all generated securely starting from a single master 
password.

## Authors:

- Andrea Croci Angelini
- Filippo Domeniconi
- Kimberly Gabriele
- Mattia Francesco D'Angelo

# Overview

### What is **Password Utility Tool**?

**Password Utility Tool** is a simple password generation and analisys software
that allows you to create, check secure passwords with various methods, and
compliant with various different security requirements.

### Are my password generated **locally**?

While this software takes the appearence of a webpage, it is a simple static
front-end page. There is no actual data being sent trough the network, besides
the first 5 digits of the SHA-1 of the password, that is being sent to the
[`haveibeenpwned`](https://haveibeenpwned.com/) API when checking for
existing breaches.

### Is it safe to use?

Yes. We took every possible precaution to make sure any password generated
using this tool will be as safe as possible.

# Installation

Installing is as simple as just downloading the source from the git repo.

### Install using git

1. Create a folder for **Password Utility Tool**
2. Run `git clone https://github.com/mattia-collab/ProjectWork_pass.git`
3. Open `index.html` in any modern browser

### Install from the source zip

1. Create a folder for **Password Utility Tool**
2. Download the source zip from the github repo
   `https://github.com/mattia-collab/ProjectWork_pass#`
3. Extract the source code
4. Open `index.html` in any modern browser

# Features

## 1. Password generator

This feature allows you to generate completely random password. The password
is generated using a cryptographically secure pseudo-random number generator.
This makes sure the random seed has enough entropy to be safe.

The character set used for generating the password consists of a total of
85 unique characters, including lowerase and uppercase letters, numbers
and symbols.
Any password that uses at least 10 characters from the entire set of
characters would take more than tens of thousands of years(**1**) to crack
with a brute force algorithm.

**We suggest using a password length of 14 or more** to ensure your password
is virtually impossible to crack.

(**1**) _calculated for 10m checks per second._

## 2. Passphrase generator

This feature allows you to generate a random passphrase. A passphrase is a
secret string that is composed out of randomly selected words, instead of
being composed out of randomly selected characters.

The word bank we use to generate your passphrase contains 20.000 unique
english words, meaning that a passphrase of 4 words chosen at random will
be very hard(**2**) to crack, and a passphrase of just 5 words will be
_virtually impossible_ to recover.

This generator is also using a cryptographically safe pseudo-random generator
to ensure the safety of the random passphrase.

(**2**) _same order of difficulty as a random password of 10 characters._

## 3. Domain password generator

Domain passwords are generated by combining a **master-password** with a
**domain-name**, then, using a deterministic algorithm that includes many
hashing steps, they are converted into a string of random characters that
is guaranteed(**3**) to be unique for each domain.

Password Utility Tool completes **1000 hashing steps**, using the
cryptographically secure SHA-256 algorithm, including the domain name at
each step for added obfuscation.
The hash is then converted to a readable string using a custom version of
[Base85 encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ascii85) to maximize the
amount of retained bytes per character length.

## 4. Password strength tester

The strength tester will enable you to perform multiple different checks
on a custom given password. The tests include:

- **Generic Entropy**: Simple entropy check based on
  [this document](https://github.com/dluppoli/EntropiaPassword/blob/main/README.md)
- **Shannon Entropy**: A more effective entropy check
  [wikipedia](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy_(information_theory)>)
- **Searching known compromised passwords** on
  [haveibeenpwned](https://haveibeenpwned.com/API/v3)

All of these checks are also included in every other feature of this tool
and are performed automatically upon any password generation.

# License

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 andrea-croci-its, mattia-collab, K1mx0

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
